.TH TTS 1 "January 2025" "tts 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tts \- text-to-speech converter using ElevenLabs API
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tts
[\fB\-k\fR \fIKEY\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR \fIVOICE\fR]
[\fB\-m\fR \fIMODEL\fR]
[\fB\-f\fR \fIFORMAT\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fISIZE\fR]
[\fB\-d\fR]
< \fIinput\fR > \fIoutput.mp3\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tts
reads text from standard input and writes audio to standard output.
It uses the ElevenLabs API to convert text to speech, processing input
in chunks for streaming large files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-k ", " \-\-api\-key " " \fIKEY\fR
ElevenLabs API key. If not specified, uses the ELEVENLABS_API_KEY
environment variable.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-voice " " \fIID\fR
Voice ID to use for speech synthesis.
Default: 21m00Tcm4TlvDq8ikWAM (Rachel)
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-model " " \fIID\fR
Model ID to use for speech synthesis.
Default: eleven_monolingual_v1
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-format " " \fIFORMAT\fR
Output audio format.
Default: mp3_44100_128
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-chunk\-size " " \fISIZE\fR
Number of characters to process per chunk. Useful for large files.
Default: 5000
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-debug
Enable debug output to stderr. Shows API requests, responses, and detailed error information.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ELEVENLABS_API_KEY
Default API key for ElevenLabs service.
.TP
.B TTS_VOICE_ID
Default voice ID.
.TP
.B TTS_MODEL_ID
Default model ID.
.TP
.B TTS_OUTPUT_FORMAT
Default output format.
.TP
.B TTS_DEBUG
Set to 1 to enable debug mode by default.
.TP
.B TTS_CHUNK_SIZE
Default chunk size for processing.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (API failure, missing input, authentication error, etc.)
.SH EXAMPLES
Convert a simple text to speech:
.PP
.nf
echo "Hello world" | tts > hello.mp3
.fi
.PP
Process a large book with custom chunk size:
.PP
.nf
cat book.txt | tts -c 10000 > book.mp3
.fi
.PP
Play audio directly without saving:
.PP
.nf
echo "Hello" | tts | mpv -
.fi
.PP
Extract and convert chapter headings:
.PP
.nf
grep "^Chapter" book.txt | tts -v EXAVITQu4vr4xnSDxMaL > chapters.mp3
.fi
.PP
Debug API issues:
.PP
.nf
echo "test" | tts -d 2>debug.log
.fi
.SH AVAILABLE VOICES
Common voice IDs include:
.PP
.TS
l l.
21m00Tcm4TlvDq8ikWAM	Rachel (default)
EXAVITQu4vr4xnSDxMaL	Bella
ErXwobaYiN019PkySvjV	Antoni
MF3mGyEYCl7XYWbV9V6O	Elli
TxGEqnHWrfWFTfGW9XjX	Josh
.TE
.SH AVAILABLE FORMATS
.TS
l l.
mp3_44100_128	MP3 128kbps (default)
mp3_44100_192	MP3 192kbps
pcm_16000	PCM 16kHz
pcm_22050	PCM 22kHz
pcm_24000	PCM 24kHz
pcm_44100	PCM 44.1kHz
ulaw_8000	μ-law 8kHz
.TE
.SH NOTES
Requires
.BR curl (1)
to be installed.
.PP
The tool processes text in chunks to handle large files efficiently,
making it suitable for converting entire books or long documents.
.PP
API errors are reported with HTTP status codes and helpful hints for
common issues like authentication failures or rate limiting.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/tts/config
Future location for configuration file (not yet implemented).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/yourusername/tts
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the tts contributors.